But somebody needs to. Well, there is some
activity going, I think, on the history of OMR,
perhaps right this year, because this is their
30th anniversary, and they're asking people to
write articles, and I wouldn't be surprised at
what they have. A historian somewhere who's
worrying about this. Well, I think that
certainly... in the period just after World War
II, there's no question, but the Navy built
oceanography. It really had, at least in the
United States. And I think one thing, well, there
just had been no deep water oceanography in the
United States before World War II. And on the other
hand, after World War II, it grew very, very fast,
and it grew because Well, there were two kinds of
contributions to the Navy, three kinds of
contributions to the Navy. One was the obvious one
of providing dollars for research. There was a
second one, which was that there were a lot of
people who, one way or another, had become
interested in the ocean during World War II by
being naval officers. And in fact, if you look
around, you'll find a fair fraction of the people
of my generation in oceanography who were indeed
naval officers or somehow or other got involved in
either that or were involved in naval research
during World War II. It was just a time when there
was a lot going on. The third thing that happened
was that the Navy had built a lot of ships during
World War II. They didn't need them when the war was
over. And so there were a number of institutions
that were able to put their hands on floating
facilities in the period of the 50s. that they
never would have, that just plain never would have
existed if it hadn't been for the naval buildup
during World War II and its subsequent decline
after World War II. We had Navy tugs and things like
this that we operated as our key research ships in
the early days of the institution. In fact, up
until, well, this went on long enough that the Navy
began to feel that it had a responsibility for
providing research ships and went ahead and
started building a whole class of research ships
And of the ships that Scripps operates right now, a
fair number of them, all the biggest ones, are
hulls that were provided by the Navy. Navy doesn't
fund the operation in any sense. We have to justify
the operational funding on the basis of research
programs. And some of those research programs are
Navy programs, some are National Science
Foundation. But the ships are made available to us
without any, you know, paying rent or anything of
this kind, they're just plain bailed to the
institutions, largely on the grounds that the
programs are indeed federal programs and too
considerable to say they aren't. And I think that
the, this, this is a fairly important kind of
thing. It's given our Navy a really strong base in
the scientific world and the capability to to do
things and to call on people for advisory help and
to have a good base of understanding of the ocean
probably couldn't have existed in any other
way. Really, you look at the different
populations in the United States, the fisheries
people, the manganese module people, the oil
people, whatever, and you see that, at least I
think, that if you look at the deep ocean, the major
consumer of information about the deep ocean is
the United States Navy. And that so that they have a
vested interest in seeing that there is good work
done. But I think that people who work in the sea
also have a kind of vested interest in seeing that
the Navy operates in an intelligent manner and so
have an obligation in return to
conceive good research things and to be sure that
they are well understood once they're finished.
The ONR has, of course, become more
mission-oriented rather than
research-oriented in the very recent past,
actually. Yeah, I guess
that may be one way of saying it. I think I would look
at it in a little different way. I think what has
happened is that science has grown
Fantastically. The Office of Naval Research
budget has not grown in pace with this. I don't
think that ONR in its major oceanographic program
has necessarily become any more applied. It's
that the field has gotten so big, the options have
gotten so big, and their budget has not increased
in proportion. So they've had to say, all right,
what are the things we're going to fund? And so out
of the range of scientific endeavors that they
could pursue in the sea, they have naturally,
since they can't do everything, they've picked up
the ones that seem to them to have the most
relevance to nature. There's been a lot of talk
about relevance and there was a manuscript
amendment game that I felt was used by a lot of
people to cut research budgets rather than to
improve relevance.
If you said, well, basic research is not relevant,
then you could cut almost anything. On the other
hand, there's hardly anything you can study in the
ocean that isn't in some way, a knowledgeable
person can show that it's in some way relevant to
the
Navy. The question of cutting down oceanographic
research on the grounds of lack of relevance is
pretty hard to justify. And in fact, if you look at
what happened to O&R during a period in which that
was really going up, it squeezed its programs, but
it squeezed the non-ocean programs a great deal
harder than it did the ocean programs. like a third
of our budget at this point, whereas in other years
there was a lot of nuclear physics and things of
this sort. And basically I think the decision was
that the Navy would fund fairly heavily in basic
research areas in which no other
mission-oriented agency in federal government
had much at stake. And so, this pretty much says
that other people who fund, the earlier people who
funded nuclear things and uses nuclear power
won't put much money into basic research in that
category. They'll put a lot into oceanography
because there aren't many other agencies that
have the radios. Do you think that the funding ONR
did earlier when it just simply gave lump sums to
institutions to be sort of parceled out to
researchers? Do you think it was more creative
then than it is now when it asked for specific
proposals? Yes. Well, what's happened over the
years is that as we've moved from these sort of
block funding things into more and more narrowly
defined projects,
on the one hand, you find that you The amount of
paperwork that you have to do for a research dollar
these days has gone up in probably a factor of 10 in
the last 15 years. It's way, way
up. The other result of what is primarily the
result of just plain projectizing everything and
cutting it down into smaller and smaller pieces,
it's around now where In the National Science
Foundation, for example, the average size of
grant in oceanography has not gone up in the last
half dozen years, in spite of the fact that
inflation has gone up. And it's clear that to get a
given amount of work done, it costs more money.
What this means is that people are dividing their
work up into smaller and smaller pieces. And this
means that the money is compartmentalized, and
you have to plan the spending on each individual
little project to within a tenth of a percent.
Whereas in other times, I think people may be under
some misapprehension with regard to this block
funding sort of business. There was always a
program presented, and certain investigators
were clearly going to be supported. It was not just
a sort of chunk of money that disappeared into the
director's office and came out the other end
according to his whim. He had to present a program.
The big advantage was that you were sort of morally
bound to put the money pretty much the way it went,
but this was sort of to within 90% instead of 99%,
and that meant that if somebody within your
organization had misjudged his budgetary
requirements, usually there were about as many
people who misjudged high as low, and you could
move the money around and compensate for this, and
everybody could get his work done on the way up to
the hill, and the money would be spent in the most
fruitful manner possible. I think that money is
not spent as fruitfully when it is divided into
little tiny packages. What about ONR and NSL, in
effect, encouraging and creating departments of
oceanography? Do you think this was essentially a
good thing?
And I don't know. Up to a point it certainly was a
good thing because oceanography had grown and
there was no reason that it should grow only in the
places where there had been oceanography in 1948
or something like that. So in that sense, there's
no... it should have been done. It had to be done.
Certainly if you took the three or four big places
and said that they were going to be now involved in
oceanography by all the academic oceanography,
they'd be considerably bigger than they are. It's
not clear that the world would be better off
without them. There was room for more. I think
there was sort of an overdoing of this, and we're
seeing that now, and I think it's kind of
retrenched. groups are kind of withering and
dying. I
think that there was no way to know what the optimum
would be, and so there was an expansion which
became an over-expansion, which now is turning
into a contraction, which I hope won't become an
over-contraction. Well, in terms of naval
stimulation of these departments, do you think
possibly scientific research is suffering now
because of the necessity of ONR in divining its
funds up to a multiplicity of departments rather
than a few institutions? I don't know. I think that
ONR, I can't speak for ONR, of course, but I think
that they are gradually adjusting themselves to
the idea that they can't support a large number of
places and that there is a certain kind of you have
to have a certain dimension before you can operate
a ship effectively and things of this kind and that
it probably is best to have oceanography done in a
fairly modest number of fairly good sized places
rather than supporting work. I think this happens
naturally to some extent in that the people who are
in disadvantaged institutions, institutions
that are just plain can't quite get up to the
threshold, they can't do as good work and so they
don't fare as well when proposals are reviewed
because they don't have the facilities and they
don't have the... Another part of the game is the
strong interaction with other people. I've been
invited by a variety of places to leave here and go
off and take a job, be director of this or professor
there or something. And every time I've searched
my soul and stayed here, and one of the major
reasons I've stayed here has been that there are
people here that I can talk to who are of a caliber
that I can't find in this kind of quantity if I go off
to some other place. And I enjoy that. I think it
helps me to do better research. So that's a part of
having a big enough place. A lot of people think
Scripps has got to be too big. I guess I haven't
heard of anybody who really left because of that
reason. In fact, most people who are here, even the
ones who say it's too big, would really like to have
one more post-doctoral fellow, maybe a couple
more graduate students, maybe an electronics
technician, and so on. There seems always to go
that way. Now that the research facilities, let's
say, are divided up between NSF and ONR, do you see
several projects which emerge which somehow seem
to fit neither NSF nor ONR standards, and thus fall
between the cracks of the floor funding, if I may
use that better? I don't know. I don't really
recognize any major problems in this regard. I
think that people do... There is a changing
pattern in the sense that people are... There are
other agencies coming in to work in the ocean,
particularly the near shore part of the ocean. And
some of them want information about the ocean and
people in the institutions are willing or
interested in providing that information in
return for the chance to get out to sea and learn
some things that they would like to know for their
own research.
By and large these other agencies are not as
skilled for that working with research people, as
the old scenario of search has been historically,
as NSF, was reasonable. So groups like IRDA and
Bureau of Land Management and so forth find that
the scientific community finds it a little
difficult to do things truthfully with them. I
think, and the fault is probably on both sides of
the ledger in the sense that And one thing you do
have to recognize is that places like in Airplane
Management or whatever have only kind of a
transient interest in the ocean. They want to find
out about the strip that's right along the coast.
And once they have that, and while there is a lot to
be learned there, they don't feel in the same sense
that the Navy does or that people who charge demand
set up with fostering mission are to be, that the
ocean is something that is their primary
scientific object of interest. There seems
traditionally ONR and NSF and well now even the
National Academy of Science have drawn the people
who gave them guidance, allow me to say, from
oceanography, sort of moving the civilians into
these administrative posts. Do you think that's
good for the military to do that?
I'm not sure exactly what you're talking about.
Ned Estenzo, Richard Vedder, Finna Jennings.
Yeah, but you say it's good for the military to do
that. I'm not sure which way we're thinking of the
migration as taking place. A lot of the people,
some people are people who were in the Navy
establishment, so there is a need out of it. off
into NSF and other places. If you look around
Washington in the oceanographic administrative
business, you'll find out that half of the leading
administrators did their first administrative
work in government in ONR. Gordon Lill, over in the
National Ocean Survey as part of NOAA, was one of
the leaders in the geophysics branch of ONR way
back in the early 50s. Fina Jennings
was one step after. I mean, two in charge
of that part, Maxwell was her, and then Lil,
Maxwell, Jennings,
and that part is going on. And Jennings, of course,
is the IDOU, and they're just, the place is
shotgun. They're in both NSF and NOAA.
I think that I enjoy, in the Navy research
business, interacting to some extent with the
naval officers as well as with the civilian
scientists. They take a completely different
viewpoint, and there are times when I appreciate a
pragmatic viewpoint
and applied viewpoint on some problems, perhaps
more than some of my colleagues do. I find it's fun
sometimes to try to cope with a problem on the ocean
or something like that. Test my ingenuity.
There's
been a great deal of pressure. Let me begin by
asking you a loaded question. There's been a great
deal of pressure in the 60s on the part of young
scientists in cooperation with the military.
Now, I really can't say, you know, 60% of the
scientists... Pressure against. Pressure, but I
mean pressure on institutions not to be as
cooperative with the military. That's right. Did
you, as a scientist coming from the military, ever
feel this kind of uneasiness in terms of
cooperation with the military?
No, I haven't felt any uneasiness. I guess that's
partly because of the situation in which I found
myself in that... I guess I sort of went at it with a
missionary viewpoint. I figured that I had enough
independence sitting in the University of
California to, and enough audacity, perhaps, to
think that I could influence the military to do
things in a more sensible way in the areas in which I
understood. And so, and I think that's been true of
some of the others who have played this game and
have done it, We were really helping to keep the
military from getting in worse trouble than they
would have gotten into, or something like this. I
have a lot of respect for a lot of the Navy people.
I've
had practically no contact with Army and Air
Force-type people. And there are a lot of Navy
people from whom I have a great deal of respect and
have worked, and I think have worked very
fruitfully. And I think it's been kind of
unfortunate that that move in the late 60s
Vietnam War and the rest of it and all the other
things, I think it was strongly the Vietnam War
that made it take that form. But I think that's been
bad for the country in the sense that their sort of
division sprang up in that the scientists who were
young in those days developed a standoffish
attitude toward the military, which in the long
run has meant that they don't have enough
perspective to see what some of the problems are
that are relevant in the ocean. At the same time, it
developed on the part of the military people a
reaction that said, well, what the hell with you?
And what that has led to is the growth of the
in-house Navy laboratories to quite substantial
size, much bigger than they had been before. And
those laboratories serve their function, they
get things done toward naming, but they don't
provide much of a back-door kind of aspect, which
is what the academic community can provide. If you
know enough about the problem and feel some
responsibility for helping to solve it in a
rational way, you can have a little less
compunction about pointing out when they think
the other color is doing it the wrong way. People in
the Navy laboratory have very little time seeing
how to do that. There also have been complaints
rising in the scientific community about the
interaction of oceanographers in particular
with private enterprise as consultants and so
forth on the grounds of obviously the ecology and
the oceans. Have you ever felt any uneasiness
about this sort of association? Well, I don't
know. Not really. I haven't had any of that sort of
association, particularly myself.
I can't think of any really good examples of people
I have professional respect for.
running
into any trouble in this recruitment. There are a
lot of marginal relation archivers who write
environmental impact statements and they do them
the best they can. And I don't feel that they're
necessarily being pushed or pulled in the right
way. They're just doing their job. And sometimes,
in fact, I suppose you've got to expect that an
environmental impact statement may come out in
such a way as to favor the developer. There's this
sort of possibility. I think
That's not the thing I thought to be particularly
bothersome. I've been aware of odd situations. I
was sitting on an advisory committee for the
governor of Alaska for a short period, and I
shouldn't take an advisory committee. that the
University of Alaska had done a thing that the
University of California had never allowed to
happen. They took some money from the pipeline
company to do an oceanographic survey in the
region of Boundies where the tanker port is going
to be at the side of the pipeline. That in itself I
have no objection to. The thing was, however, that
they were willing to take with the money a
restriction on the lease of the data to anybody for
five years, something like that. And anybody
meant even another part of the Alaskan
government. And they found themselves in a very
awkward position when the Alaskan government
fisheries groups and so forth started doing
physical oceanography. They had to do the whole
thing over again. They couldn't use the
University of Alaska data because of the
agreement that had gone with the funding. That's
the kind of thing that can give the whole game a bad
name, it
seems to me. Now, I want to return to ONR, if I can,
for a second. In terms of ONR's funding of
projects, was it your experience that the things
ONR was interested in tended to attract the
scientists to it? Is it the grants themselves,
sort of predetermined research? Let me try that.
I don't think so. It's always hard to decide. I
guess I was using some words like basic research
and things like that a while ago. I find those
really are not very satisfying terms. I think in
fact that one man's basic research can be another
man's applied research. The doer doesn't have to
even have the same evaluation of it as the sponsor
does. And
if you run a good institution, why the idea is to see
that the people who are interested in certain
kinds of things make contact with sponsors who are
interested in those same kinds of
investigations. That's a kind of idealistic
picture. It doesn't really work that way, except
perhaps in first order. But nevertheless, that's
the way it ideally should
work. These days, I think that a scientist is faced
with enough choices about what to do that you can't
claim that you do a particular experiment just
because in some abstract way it was more
scientifically interesting.
You're rattled around by your peers in terms of
what you're working on, and you're rattled around
by the funding agencies in terms of what they're
interested in putting money in, On top of that,
you're rattled around by just what kinds of tools
you have or what your own capabilities are. And
with all of those, you have a lot of options as to
what the next thing is you're going to work on. And
you sort of take a weighted average across all of
these different things, and sometimes you'll
come up with pushing pretty hard to work on
something where the funding
doesn't come very easily. Well, it may turn out
that, in fact, the funding and your own
inclination go in the same direction pretty
easily. I think that what you wind up with, of
course, is some sort of natural selection in the
sense that physical oceanographers that are
interested in a particular kind of problem are
more likely to be supported by O&R than those that
are interested in some other kind of problem. This
is why I'm very much opposed to various
congressmen's ideas about having a single agency
for supporting the motion of interest and all
sorts of things, because if there were only one,
then you'd only have this single monolithic thing
to deal with, and the kind of research we can do
would lose its sort of resiliency and diversity,
which now exists because you can do certain things
within our sphere, you can do other things within
the NSF sphere, or either of those, like what you
want to do, or you can go try your land management,
or geological survey, or whatever. And I think
we'll have a healthy community as long as we have
this diversity of interests on the part of the
users, and I think it's a mistake to try to think you
can truthfully take the
the needs of some agency and represent them in some
other agency and expect this is going to have any
fruitful result. But if an agency needs to know
about the ocean, it needs to have some people
working for it who in fact know about the ocean and
are trying to learn about the ocean. And this
almost means that even within the Navy, I have
regretted some of the moves that they've taken to
try to centralize oceanography. I think that
there's a limit to how far you should go in that
regard. You really should leave some of the
oceanography scattered out around because it'll
be used better. It's just lying there on the desk
next to you. If you sit in a building where there's
oceanography, you're more likely to think about
the ocean.